A FEW MILES south of Soledad, the Salinas River drops in close
to the hillside bank and runs deep and green. The water is warm
too, for it has slipped twinkling over the yellow sands in the
sunlight before reaching the narrow pool. On one side of the river
the golden foothill slopes curve up to the strong and rocky Gabilan
mountains, but on the valley side the water is lined with trees -
willows fresh and green with every spring, carrying in their lower
leaf junctures the debris of the winter's flooding; and sycamores
with mottled, white, recumbent limbs and branches that arch over
the pool. On the sandy bank under the trees the leaves lie deep
and so crisp that a lizard makes a great skittering if he runs
among them. Rabbits come out of the brush to sit on the sand in
the evening, and the damp flats are covered with the night tracks
of 'coons, and with the spread pads of dogs from the ranches, and
with the split-wedge tracks of deer that come to drink in the dark.
There is a path through the willows and among the sycamores, a
path beaten hard by boys coming down from the ranches to swim
in the deep pool, and beaten hard by tramps who come wearily
down from the highway in the evening to jungle-up near water. In
front of the low horizontal limb of a giant sycamore there is an ash
pile made by many fires; the limb is worn smooth by men who
have sat on it.
Evening of a hot day started the little wind to moving among the
leaves. The shade climbed up the hills toward the top. On the sand
banks the rabbits sat as quietly as little gray, sculptured stones.
And then from the direction of the state highway came the sound
of footsteps on crisp sycamore leaves. The rabbits hurried
noiselessly for cover. A stilted heron labored up into the air and
pounded down river. For a moment the place was lifeless, and
then two men emerged from the path and came into the opening
by the green pool.
They had walked in single file down the path, and even in the
open one stayed behind the other. Both were dressed in denim
trousers and in denim coats with brass buttons. Both wore black,
shapeless hats and both carried tight blanket rolls slung over
their shoulders. The first man was small and quick, dark of face,
with restless eyes and sharp, strong features. Every part of him
was defined: small, strong hands, slender arms, a thin and bony
nose. Behind him walked his opposite, a huge man, shapeless of
face, with large, pale eyes, with wide, sloping shoulders; and he
walked heavily, dragging his feet a little, the way a bear drags his
paws. His arms did not swing at his sides, but hung loosely.
The first man stopped short in the clearing, and the follower
nearly ran over him. He took off his hat and wiped the sweat-band
with his forefinger and snapped the moisture off. His huge
companion dropped his blankets and flung himself down and
drank from the surface of the green pool; drank with long gulps,
snorting into the water like a horse. The small man stepped
nervously beside him.
"Lennie!" he said sharply. "Lennie, for God' sakes don't drink so
much." Lennie continued to snort into the pool. The small man
leaned over and shook him by the shoulder. "Lennie. You gonna be
sick like you was last night."
Lennie dipped his whole head under, hat and all, and then he sat
up on the bank and his hat dripped down on his blue coat and ran
down his back. "Tha's good," he said. "You drink some, George.
You take a good big drink." He smiled happily.
George unslung his bindle and dropped it gently on the bank. "I
ain't sure it's good water," he said. "Looks kinda scummy."
Lennie dabb1ed his big paw in the water and wiggled his fingers
so the water arose in little splashes; rings widened across the pool
to the other side and came back again. Lennie watched them go.
"Look, George. Look what I done."
George knelt beside the pool and drank from his hand with quick
scoops. "Tastes all right," he admitted. "Don't really seem to be
running, though. You never oughta drink water when it ain't
running, Lennie," he said hopelessly. "You'd drink out of a gutter
if you was thirsty." He threw a scoop of water into his face and
rubbed it about with his hand, under his chin and around the back
of his neck. Then he replaced his hat, pushed himself back from
the river, drew up his knees and embraced them. Lennie, who had
been watching, imitated George exactly. He pushed himself back,
drew up his knees, embraced them, looked over to George to see
whether he had it just right. He pulled his hat down a little more
over his eyes, the way George's hat was.
George stared morosely at the water. The rims of his eyes were
red with sun glare. He said angrily, "We could just as well of rode
clear to the ranch if that bastard bus driver knew what he was
talkin' about. ‘Jes' a little stretch down the highway,' he says. ‘Jes'
a little stretch.' God damn near four miles, that's what it was!
Didn't wanta stop at the ranch gate, that's what. Too God damn
lazy to pull up. Wonder he isn't too damn good to stop in Soledad
at all. Kicks us out and says, ‘Jes' a little stretch down the road.' I
bet it was
more than four miles. Damn hot day."
Lennie looked timidly over to him. "George?"
"Yeah, what ya want?"
"Where we goin', George?"
The little man jerked down the brim of his hat and scowled over
at Lennie. "So yon forgot that awready, did you? I gotta tell you
again, do I? Jesus Christ, you're a crazy bastard!"
"I forgot," Lennie said softly. "I tried not to forget. Honest to God I
did, George."
"O.K.- O.K. I'll tell ya again. I ain't got nothing to do. Might jus'
as well spen' all my time tellin' you things and then you forget
'em, and I tell you again."
"Tried and tried," said Lennie, "but it didn't do no good. I
remember about the rabbits, George."
"The hell with the rabbits. That's all you ever can remember is
them rabbits. O.K.! Now you listen and this time you got to
remember so we don't get in no trouble. You remember settin' in
that gutter on Howard Street and watchin' that blackboard?"
Lennie's face broke into a delighted smile. "Why sure, George. I
remember that.... but.... what'd we do then? I remember some girls
come by and you says.... you say."
"The hell with what I says. You remember about us goin' into
Murray and Ready's, and they give us work cards and bus
tickets?"
"Oh, sure, George. I remember that now." His hands went quickly
into his side coat pockets. He said gently, "George.... I ain't got
mine. I musta lost it," He looked down at the ground in despair.
"You never had none, you crazy bastard. I got both of 'em here.
Think I'd let you carry your own work card?"
Lennie grinned with relief. "I.... I thought I put it in my side
pocket." His hand went into the pocket again.
George looked sharply at him. "What'd you take outa that
pocket?"
"Ain't a thing in my pocket," Lennie said cleverly.
"I know there ain't. You got it in your hand. What you got in your
hand - hidin' it?"
"I ain't got nothin', George, Honest."
"Come on, give it here."
Lennie held his closed hand away from George's direction. "It's
only a mouse, George."
"A mouse? A live mouse?"
"Uh-uh. Jus' a dead mouse, George. I didn' kill it. ' Honest! I
found it. I found it dead."
"Give it here!" said George.
"Aw, leave me have it, George."
"Give it
here!"
Lennie's closed hand slowly obeyed. George took the mouse and
threw it across the pool to the other side, among the brush. "What
you want of a dead mouse, anyways?"
"I could pet it with my thumb while we walked along," said
Lennie.
"Well, you ain't petting no mice while you walk with me. You
remember where we're goin' now?"
Lennie looked startled and then in embarrassment hid his face
against his knees. "I forgot again."
"Jesus Christ," George said resignedly. "Well - look, we're gonna
work on a ranch like the one we come from up north"
"Up north?"
"In Weed."
"Oh, sure. I remember. In Weed."
"That ranch we're goin' to is right down there about a quarter
mile. We're gonna go in an' see the boss. Now, look - I'll give him
the work tickets, but you ain't gonna say a word. You jus' stand
there and don't say nothing. If he finds out what a crazy bastard
you are, we won't get no job, but if he sees ya work before he hears
ya talk, we're set. Ya got that?"
"Sure, George. Sure I got it."
"O.K. Now when we go in to see the boss, what you gonna do?"
"I.... I," Lennie thought. His face grew tight with thought. "I....
ain't gonna say nothin'. Jus' gonna stan' there."
"Good boy. That's swell. You say that over two, three times so you
sure won't forget it."
Lennie droned to himself softly, "I ain't gonna say nothin'.... I
ain't gonna say nothin'.... I ain't gonna say nothin'."
"O.K.," said George. "An' you ain't gonna do no bad things like you
done in Weed, neither."
Lennie looked puzzled. "Like I done in Weed?"
"Oh, so ya forgot that too, did ya. Well, I ain't gonna remind ya,
fear ya do it again."
A light of understanding broke on Lennie's face. "They run us
outa Weed," he exploded triumphantly.
"Run us out, hell," said George disgustedly. "We run. They was
lookin' for us, but they didn't catch us.

"Well, I tell ya what - Curley says he's keepin' that hand soft for
his wife."
George studied the cards absorbedly. "That's a dirty thing to tell
around," he said.
The old man was reassured. He had drawn a derogatory
statement from George. He felt safe now, and be spoke more
confidently. "Wait'll you see Curley's wife."
George cut the cards again and put out a solitaire lay, slowly and
deliberately. "Purty?" he asked casually.
"Yeah. Purty . . . . but-"
George studied his cards. "But what?"
"Well--she got the eye."
"Yeah? Married two weeks and got the eye? Maybe that's why
Curley's pants is full of ants."
"I seen her give Slim the eye. Slim's a jerkline skinner. Hell of a
nice fella. Slim don't need to wear no high-heeled boots on a grain
team. I seen her give Slim the eye. Curley never seen it. An' I seen
her give Carlson the eye."
George pretended a lack of interest. "Looks like we was gonna
have fun."
The swamper stood up from his box. "Know what I think?" George
did not answer. "Well, I think Curley's married . . . . a tart."
"He ain't the first," said George. "There's plenty done that."
The old man moved toward the door, and his ancient dog lifted his
head and peered about, and then got painfully to his feet to follow.
"I gotta be settin' out the wash basins for the guys. The teams'll be
in before long. You guys gonna buck barley?"
"Yeah."
"You won't tell Curley nothing I said?"
"Hell no."
"Well, you look her over, mister. You see if she ain't a tart." He
stepped out the door into the brilliant sunshine.
George laid down his cards thoughtfully, turned his piles of three.
He built four clubs on his ace pile. The sun square was on the floor
now, and the flies whipped through it like sparks. A sound of
jingling harness and the croak of heavy-laden axles sounded from
outside. From the distance came a clear call. "Stable Buck--ooh,
sta-able Buck!" And then, " Where the hell is that God damn
nigger?"
George stared at his solitaire lay, and then he flounced the cards
together and turned around to Lennie. Lennie was lying down on
the bunk watching him.
"Look, Lennie! This here ain't no set up. I'm scared. You gonna
have trouble with that Curley guy. I seen that kind before. He was
kinda feelin' you out. He figures he's got you scared and he's
gonna take a sock at you the first chance he gets."
Lennie's eyes were frightened. "I don't want no trouble," he said
plaintively. "Don't let him sock me, George."
George got up and went over to Lennie's bunk and sat down on it.
"I hate that kinda bastard," he said. "I seen plenty of 'em. Like the
old guy says, Curley don't take no chances. He always wins." He
thought for a moment. "If he tangles with you, Lennie, we're
gonna get the can. Don't make no mistake about that. He's the
boss's son. Look, Lennie. You try to keep away from him, will you?
Don't never speak to him. If he comes in here you move clear to
the other side of the room. Will you do that, Lennie?"
"I don't want no trouble," Lennie mourned. "I never done nothing
to him."
"Well, that won't do you no good if Curley wants to plug himself
up for a fighter. Just don't have nothing to do with him. Will you
remember?"
"Sure, George. I ain't gonna say a word."
The sound of the approaching grain teams was louder, thud of big
hooves on hard ground, drag of brakes and the jingle of trace
chains. Men were calling back and forth from the teams. George,
sitting on the bunk beside Lennie, frowned as he thought Lennie
asked timidly, "You ain't mad, George?"
"I ain't mad at you. I'm mad at this here Curley bastard. I hoped
we was gonna get a little stake together-maybe a hundred
dollars." His tone grew decisive. "You keep away from Curley,
Lennie."
"Sure I will, George. I won't say a word."
"Don't let him pull you in-but-if the son-of-abitch socks you-let 'im
have it."
"Let 'im have what, George?"
"Never mind, never mind. I'll tell you when. I hate that kind of a
guy. Look, Lennie, if you get in any kind of trouble, you remember
what I told you to do?"
Lennie raised up on his elbow. His face contorted with thought.
Then his eyes moved sadly to George's face. "If I get in any
trouble, you ain't gonna let me tend the rabbits."
"That's not what I meant. You remember where we slep' last
night? Down by the river?"
"Yeah. I remember. Oh, sure I remember! I go there an' hide in
the brush."
"Hide till I come for you. Don't let nobody see you. Hide in the
brush by the river. Say that over."
"Hide in the brush by the river, down in the brush by the river."
"If you get in trouble."
"If I get in trouble."
A brake screeched outside. A call came, "StableBuck. Oh! Sta-able
Buck."
George said, "Say it over to yourself, Lennie, so you won't forget
it."
Both men glanced up, for the rectangle of sunshine in the
doorway was cut off. A girl was standing there looking in. She had
full, rouged lips and wide-spaced eyes, heavily made up. Her
fingernails were red. Her hair hung in little rolled clusters, like
sausages. She wore a cotton house dress and red mules, on the
insteps of which were little bouquets of red ostrich feathers. "I'm
lookin' for Curley," she said. Her voice had a nasal, brittle quality.
George looked away from her and then back. "He was in here a
minute ago, but he went."
"Oh!" She put her hands behind her back and leaned against the
door frame so that her body was thrown forward. "You're the new
fellas that just come, ain't ya?"
"Yeah."
Lennie's eyes moved down over her body, and though she did not
seem to be looking at Lennie she bridled a little. She looked at her
fingernails. "Sometimes Curley's in here," she explained.
George said brusquely, "Well he ain't now."
"If he ain't, I guess I better look some place else," she said
playfully.
Lennie watched her, fascinated. George said, "If I see him, I'll
pass the word you was looking for him.
She smiled archly and twitched her body. "Nobody can't blame a
person for lookin'," she said. There were footsteps behind her,
going by. She turned her head. "Hi, Slim," she said.
Slim's voice came through the door. "Hi, Goodlookin'."
"I'm tryin' to find Curley, Slim."
"Well, you ain't tryin' very hard. I seen him goin' in your house."
She was suddenly apprehensive. "Bye, boys," she called into the
bunk house, and she hurried away.
George looked around at Lennie. "Jesus, what a tramp," he said.
"So that's what Curley picks for a wife."
"She's purty," said Lennie defensively.
"Yeah, and she's sure hidin' it. Curley got his work ahead of him.
Bet she'd clear out for twenty bucks."
Lennie still stared at the doorway where she had been. "Gosh, she
was purty." He smiled admiringly. George looked quickly down at
him and then he took him by an ear and shook him.
"Listen to me, you crazy bastard," he said fiercely. "Don't you
even take a look at that bitch. I don't care what she says and what
she does. I seen 'em poison before, but I never seen no piece of jail
bait worse than her. You leave her be."
Lennie tried to disengage his ear. "I never done nothing, George."
"No, you never. But when she was standin' in the doorway
showin' her legs, you wasn't lookin' the other way, neither."
"I never meant no harm, George. Honest I never."
"Well, you keep away from her, 'cause she's a rattrap if I ever
seen one. You let Curley take the rap. He let himself in for it.
Glove fulla vaseline," George said disgustedly. "An' I bet he's eatin'
raw eggs and writin' to the patent medicine houses."
Lennie cried out suddenly-"I don' like this place, George. This
ain't no good place. I wanna get outa here."
"We gotta keep it till we get a stake. We can't help it, Lennie.
We'll get out jus' as soon as we can. I don't like it no better than
you do." He went back to the table and set out a new solitaire
hand. "No, I don't like it," he said. "For two bits I'd shove out of
here. If we can get jus' a few dollars in the poke we'll shove off and
go up the American River and pan gold. We can make maybe a
couple of dollars a day there, and we might hit a pocket."
Lennie leaned eagerly toward him. "Le's go, George. Le's get outta
here. It's mean here."
"We gotta stay," George said shortly. "Shut up now. The guys'll be
cumin' in."
From the washroom nearby came the sound of running water and
rattling basins. George studied the cards. "Maybe we oughtta
wash up," he said. "But we ain't done nothing to get dirty."
A tall man stood in the doorway. He held a crushed Stetson hat
under his arm while he combed his long, black, damp hair straight
back. Like the others he wore blue jeans and a short denim jacket.
When he had finished combing his hair he moved into the room,
and he moved with a majesty only achieved by royalty and master
craftsmen. He was a jerkline skinner, the prince of the ranch,
capable of driving ten, sixteen, even twenty mules with a single
line to the leaders. He was capable of killing a fly on the wheeler's
butt with a bull whip without touching the mule. There was a
gravity in his manner and a quiet so profound that all talk
stopped when he spoke. His authority was so great that his word
was taken on any subject, be it politics or love. This was Slim, the
jerkline skinner. His hatchet face was ageless. He might have
been thirty-five or fifty. His ear heard more than was said to him,
and his slow speech had overtones not of thought, but of
understanding beyond thought. His hands, large and lean, were as
delicate in their action as those of a temple dancer.
He smoothed out his crushed hat, creased it in the middle and put
it on. He looked kindly at the two in the bunk house. "It's
brighter'n a bitch outside," he said gently. "Can't hardly see
nothing in here. You the new guys?"
"Just come," said George.
"Gonna buck barley?"
"That's what the boss says."
Slim sat down on a box across the table from
George. He studied the solitaire hand that was upside down to
him. "Hope you get on my team," he said. His voice was very
gentle. "I gotta pair of punks on my team that don't know a barley
bag from a blue ball. You guys ever bucked any barley?"
"Hell, yes," said George. "I ain't nothing to scream about, but that
big bastard there can put up more grain alone than most pairs
can."
Lennie, who had been following the conversation back and forth
with his eyes, smiled complacency at the compliment. Slim looked
approvingly at George for having given the compliment. He leaned
over the table and snapped the corner of a loose card. "You guys
travel around together?" His tone was friendly. It invited
confidence without demanding it.
"Sure," said George. "We kinda look after each other." He
indicated Lennie with his thumb. "He ain't bright. Hell of a good
worker, though. Hell of a nice fella, but he ain't bright. I've knew
him for a long time."
Slim looked through George and beyond him. "Ain't many guys
travel around together," he mused. "I don't know why. Maybe
ever'body in the whole damn world is scared of each other."
"It's a lot nicer to go around with a guy you know," said George.
A powerful, big-stomached man came into the bunk house. His
head still dripped water from the scrubbing and dousing. "Hi,
Slim," he said, and then stopped and stared at George and Lennie.
"These guys jus' come," said Slim by way of introduction.
"Glad to meet ya," the big man said. "My name's Carlson."
"I'm George Milton. This here's Lennie Small."
"Glad to meet ya," Carlson said again. "He ain't very small." He
chuckled softly at his joke. "Ain't small at all," he repeated.
"Meant to ask you, Slim-how's your bitch? I seen she wasn't under
your wagon this morning."
"She slang her pups last night," said Slim. "Nine of 'em. I
drowned four of 'em right off. She couldn't feed that many."
"Got five left, huh?"

Candy cried, "Sure they all want it. Everybody wants a little bit of
land, not much. Jus' som'thin' that was his. Som'thin' he could live
on and there couldn't nobody throw him off of it. I never had none.
I planted crops for damn near ever'body in this state, but they
wasn't my crops, and when I harvested 'em, it wasn't none of any
harvest. But we gonna do it now, and don't you make no mistake
about that. George ain't got the money in town. That money's in
the bank. Me an' Lennie an' George. We gonna have a room to
ourself. We're gonna have a dog an' rabbits an' chickens. We're
gonna have green corn an' maybe a cow or a goat." He stopped,
overwhelmed with his picture.
Crooks asked, "You say you got the money?"
"Damn right. We got most of it. Just a little bit more to get. Have
it all in one month. George got the land all picked out, too."
Crooks reached around and explored his spine with his hand. "I
never seen a guy really do it," he said. "I seen guys nearly crazy
with loneliness for land, but ever' time a whore house or a
blackjack game took what it takes." He hesitated. If you . . . . guys
would want a hand to work for nothing-just his keep, why I'd come
an' lend a hand. I ain't so crippled I can't work like a son-of-a-bitch
if I want to."
"Any you boys seen Curley?"
They swung their heads toward the door. Looking in was Curley's
wife. Her face was heavily made up. Her lips were slightly parted.
She breathed strongly, as though she had been running.
"Curley ain't been here," Candy said sourly.
She stood still in the doorway, smiling a little at them, rubbing
the nails of one hand with the thumb and forefinger of the other.
And her eyes traveled from one face to another. "They left all the
weak ones here," she said finally. "Think I don't know where they
all went? Even Curley. I know where they all went."
Lennie watched her, fascinated; but Candy and Crooks were
scowling down away from her eyes. Candy said, "Then if you
know, why you want to ast us where Curley is at?"
She regarded them amusedly. "Funny thing," she said. "If I catch
any one man, and he's alone, I get along fine with him. But just let
two of the guys get together an' you won't talk. Jus' nothing but
mad" She dropped her fingers and put her hands on her hips.
"You're all scared of each other, that's what. Ever' one of you's
scared the rest is goin' to get something on you."
After a pause Crooks said, "Maybe you better go along to your
own house now. We don't want no trouble."
"Well, I ain't giving you no trouble. Think I don't like to talk to
somebody ever' once in a while? Think I like to stick in that house
afla time?"
Candy laid the stump of his wrist on his knee and rubbed it
gently with his hand. He said accusingly, "You gotta husban'. You
got no call foolin' aroun' with other guys, causin' trouble."
The girl flared up. "Sure I gotta husban'. You all seen him. Swell
guy, ain't he? Spends all his time sayin' what he's gonna do to
guys he don't like, and he don't like nobody. Think I'm gonna stay
in that twoby-four house and listen how Curley's gonna lead with
his left twict, and then bring in the of right cross? `One-two' he
says. `Jus' the of one-two an' he'll go down."' She paused and her
face lost its sullenness and grew interested. "Say-what happened
to Curley's ban'?"
There was an embarrassed silence. Candy stole a look at Lennie.
Then he coughed. "Why . . . . Curley . . . . he got his han' caught in
a machine, ma'am. Butt his ban'."
She watched for a moment, and then she laughed. "Baloney!
What you think you're sellin' me? Curley started som'pin' he didn'
finish. Caught in a machine -baloney! Why, he ain't give nobody
the good of onetwo since he got his ban' bust. Who bust him?"
Candy repeated sullenly, "Got it caught in a machine."
"Awright," she said contemptuously. "Awright, cover 'im up if ya
wanta. Whatta I care? You bindle bums think you're so damn
good. Whatta ya think I am, a kid? I tell ya I could of went with
shows. Not jus' one, neither. An' a guy tol' me he could put me in
pitchers. . . :' She was breathless with indignation. "Sat'iday night.
Ever'body out doin' som'pin'. Ever'body! An' what am I doin'?
Standin' here talkin' to a bunch of bindle stiffs-a nigger an' a dum-
dum and a lousy of sheep-n' Orin' it because they ain't nobody
else."
Lennie watched her, his mouth half open. Crooks had retired into
the terrible protective dignity of the Negro. But a change came
over old Candy. He stood up suddenly and knocked his nail keg
over backward. "I had enough," he said angrily. "You ain't wanted
here. We told you you ain't. An' I tell ya, you got floozy idears
about what us guys amounts to. You ain't got sense enough in that
chicken head to even see that we ain't stiffs. S'pose you get us
canned. S'pose you do. You think we'll hit the highway an' look for
another lousy two-bit job like this. You don't know that we got our
own ranch to go to, an' our own house. We ain't got to stay here.
We gotta house and chickens an' fruit trees an' a place a hunderd
time prettier than this. An' we got fren's, that's what we got.
Maybe there was a time when we was scared of gettin' canned, but
we ain't no more. We got our own lan', and it's ours, an' we c'n go
to it"
Curley's wife laughed at him. "Baloney," she said. "I seen too
many you guys. If you had two bits in the worl', why you'd be in
gettin' two shots of corn with it and suckin' the bottom of the
glass. I know you guys."
Candy's face had grown redder and redder, but before she was
done speaking, he had control of himself. He was the master of the
situation. "I might of knew," he said gently. "Maybe you just better
go along an' roll your hoop. We ain't got nothing to say to you at
all. We know what we got, and we don't care whether you know it
or not. So maybe you better jus' scatter along now, 'cause Curley
maybe ain't gonna like his wife out in the barn with us `bindle
stiffs."'
She looked from one face to another, and they were all closed
against her. And she looked longest at Lennie, until he dropped
his eyes in embarrassment. Suddenly she said, "Where'd you get
them bruises on your face?"
Lennie looked up guiltily. "Who-me?"
"Yeah, you."
Lennie looked to Candy for help, and then he looked at his lap
again. "He got his han' caught in a machine," he said.
Curley's wife laughed. "O.K., Machine. I'll talk to you later. I like
machines."
Candy broke in. "You let this guy alone. Don't you do no messing
aroun' with him. I'm gonna tell George what you says. George
won't have you messin' with Lennie."
"Who's George?" she asked. "The little guy you come with?"
Lennie smiled happily. "That's him," he said. "That's the guy, an'
he's gonna let me tend the rabbits."
"Well, if that's all you want, I might get a couple rabbits myself."
Crooks stood up from his bunk and faced her. "I had enough," he
said coldly. "You got no rights comin' in a colored man's room. You
got no rights messing around in here at all. Now you jus' get out,
an' get out quick. If you don't, I'm gonna ast the boss not to ever
let you come in the barn no more."
She turned on him in scorn. "Listen, Nigger," she said. "You know
what I can do to you if you open. your trap?"
Crooks stared hopelessly at her, and then he sat down on his
bunk and drew into himself.
She closed on him. "You know what I could do?"
Crooks seemed to grow smaller, and he pressed? himself against
the wall. "Yes, ma'am."
"Well, you keep your place then, Nigger. I could get you strung up
on a tree so easy it ain't even funny."
Crooks had reduced himself to nothing. There was no personality,
no ego-nothing to arouse either like or dislike. He said, "Yes,
ma'am," and his voice was toneless.
For a moment she stood over him. as though waiting for him to
move so that she could whip at him again; but Crooks sat perfectly
still, his eyes averted, everything that might be hurt drawn in.
She turned at last to the other two.
Old Candy was watching her, fascinated. "If you was to do that,
we'd tell," he said quietly. "We'd tell about you framin' Crooks."
"Tell an' be damned," she cried. "Nobody'd listen to you, an' you
know it. Nobody'd listen to you."
Candy subsided. "No ..." he agreed. "Nobody'd listen to us."
Lennie whined, "I wisht George was here. I wisht George was
here."
Candy stepped over to him. "Don't you worry none," he said. "I
jus' heard the guys comin' in. George'll be in the bunk house right
now, I bet." He turned to Curley's wife. "You better go home now,"
he said quietly. "If you go right now, we won't tell Curley you was
here."
She appraised him coolly. "I ain't sure you heard nothing."
"Better not take no chances," he said. "If you ain't sure, you better
take the safe way."
She turned to Lennie. "I'm glad you bust up Curley a little bit. He
got it comin' to him. Sometimes I'd like to bust him myself." She
slipped out the door and disappeared into the dark barn. And
while she went through the barn, the halter chains rattled, and
some horses snorted and some stamped their feet.
Crooks seemed to come slowly out of the layers of protection he
bad put on. "Was that the truth what you said about the guys
come back?" he asked.
"Sure. I heard 'em."
"Well, I didn't hear nothing."
"The gate banged," Candy said, and he went on, "Jesus Christ,
Curley's wife can move quiet. I guess she had a lot of practice,
though."
Crooks avoided the whole subject now. "Maybe you guys better
go," he said. "I ain't sure I want you in here no more. A colored
man got to have some rights even if he don't like 'em."
Candy said, "That bitch didn't ought to of said that to you."
"It wasn't nothing," Crooks said dully. "You guys comin' in an'
settin' made me forget. What she says is true."
The horses snorted out in the barn and the chains rang and a
voice called, "Lennie. Oh, Lennie. You in the barn?"
"It's George," Lennie cried. And he answered, "Here, George. I'm
right in here."
In a second George stood framed in the door, and he looked
disapprovingly about. "What you doin' in Crooks' room? You
hadn't ought to lie here."
Crooks nodded "I tol' 'em, but they come in anyways."
"Well, why'n't you kick'em out?"
"I di'n't care much," said Crooks. "Lennie's a nice fella."
Now Candy aroused himself. "Oh, George! I been figurin' and
figurin'. I got it doped out how we can even make some money on
them rabbits."
George scowled. "I thought I tol' you not to tell nobody about
that."
Candy was crestfallen. "Didn't tell nobody but Crooks."
George said, "Well you guys get outta here. Jesus, seems like I
can't go away for a minute."
Candy and Lennie stood up and went toward the door. Crooks
called, "Candy!"
"Huh?"
"'Member what I said about hoein' and doin' odd jobs?"
"Yeah," said Candy. "I remember."
"Well, jus' forget it," said Crooks. "I didn' mean it. Jus' foolin'. I
wouldn' want to go no place like that."
"Well, O.K., if you feel like that. Good-night"
The three men went out of the door. As they went through the
barn the horses snorted and the halter chains rattled.
Crooks sat on his bunk and looked at the door' for a moment, and
then he reached for the liniment bottle. He pulled out his shirt in
back, poured a little, liniment in his pink palm and, reaching
around, he, fell slowly to rubbing his back.
